CVE 202 - STRENGTH OF MATERIALS (2-0-3 = 3 units)
Further analysis of shearing force and bending moments in beams. 
Direct stresses due to load and temperature. 
Loading tests of ductile and brittle 
Elastic constants. 
Modified young modulus.  
Poisson's ratio.  
Properties of beam sections. 
Deflection of beams.
Torsion of shafts.  
Bending of curved bars and rigid frames. 
Buckling of struts and columns.

CVE 301 - SURVEYING I (2-0-3 = 3 units)
Introduction - Principles of survey operations 
	     - Classification of survey methods, instruments and their uses.  
Theory of survey measurements - Linear measurements
                              - Chain surveying.  
Angular measurements - Compass survey.  
Introduction to theodolite traversing - Levelling
				      - Calculation of areas 
				      - Plane table surveys, tacheometric surveys, simple triangulation and trilateration 
				      - Introduction to Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing.

CVE 302 - SURVEYING II (2-0-3 = 3 units)
Principles of route design and route location - Levelling, cross sectioning and profiling 
					      - Computations involving horizontal and vertical curves 
					      - Computation of earthwork quantities 
					      - Development of mass haul diagrams 
					      - staking of slopes and buildings 
					      - Methods of triangulation observation and adjustment
					      - Photogrammetric and remote sensing techniques in highway engineering
					      - Introduction to hydrographic surveys 
					      - Principles of astronomy 
					      - Map projections.  
Introduction to Highway Engineering.

CVE 303 - INTRODUCTION TO CIVIL ENGIENEERING PRACTICE (0-0-2 = 1 units)
Civil Engineering as a profession - functions, training and responsibilities.  
Overview of the sub-disciplines of civil engineering.  
States of engineering project execution, including conception, feasibility studies, detailed design, preparation of Bill of Quantities and contract documents.  
Roles of different grades of workers on a project - labourers, artisans, technologists, engineers, project planning.

CVE 304 - MATERIALS FOR CIVIL ENGINEERING CONSTRUCTION (2-0-0 = 2 units)
Concrete Technology: Physical and rheological properties of concrete.  
Properties of components of concrete - cement, aggregate, water and admixtures, concrete mix. 
Design methods of production of asphalt, cement, tars, bitumen and emulsion: their properties and uses.  
Properties of timber, glass, plastics, asbestos, clay bricks and other construction materials.

CVE 305 - HYDROLOGY (2-0-3 = 3 units)
The hydrologic cycle, history of hydrology, scope and application of hydrology; climatic measurements, precipitation and precipitation analysis; analysis of hydrologic data including statistical inferences; infiltration, evaporation and evapotranspiration; Runoff and hydrograph analysis; stream and reservoir routing; Groundwater analysis including well hydraulics; Design criteria for hydraulic projects.

CVE 306 -  STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS I (2-1-0 = 3 units)
Reactions, shears, moments and deflections in beams, trusses and frames under fixed and moveable 
loads, influence lines and loading criteria, analysis of simple statically indeterminate structures.

CVE 308 - DESIGN OF CONCRETE STRUCTURES I (2-0-3 = 3 units)
Limit State design - general assumptions, code BS:8110: Material and loads.  
Serviceability limit states.
Rules for arrangement of reinforcement.  
Singly reinforced beams - rectangular and flanged sections. 
Doubly reinforced beams.  Curtailment of reinforcement.  
Shear in beams; torsion and shear.  
Columns - interaction of bending and compression.  
One-way spanning slabs.
One-way ribbed slabs, Student project.

CVE 310 -  BASIC CIVIL ENGINEERING (For non-civil engineers)(2-0-0 = 2 units)
Relevance of the course to non-civil engineers.  
Principles of surveying, elements of soil mechanics timber, steel and reinforced concrete structures, concrete mixes.  
Outline of structural design in concrete and steel structures.  
Design of foundations or concrete pads for equipment.

CVE 394 - MATERIALS FOR CIVIL ENGINEERING CONSTRUCTION LABORATORY (0-0-3 = 1 units)
Determination of the specific gravity of cement powder, standard consistency of cement paste; initial setting time and final setting time of Portland cement.  Evaluation of the soundness of Portland cement.  
Conduction of the grading analysis of fine aggregates.  
Determination of the aggregate crushing value of coarse aggregates; workability of fresh concrete by the slump test and compacting factor; modulus of rupture for plain concrete specimen by conducting a bending test; moisture content of a given timber specimen and its dry density; modulus of rupture of timber specimen; specific gravity of bituminous materials; consistency, durability and temperature susceptibility of asphalt cement.  
Preparation of highway surfacing material

CVE 401 -  TECHNICAL REPORT WRITING (2-0-0 = 2 units)
Role of technical reports in engineering projects.  
Fundamental principles of technical writing.  
Formats of different types of reports - outlines, purpose and scope, technical discussion details, role of appendix, function of figures, tables and illustrations.  Literature search, references (citing and listing).  
Nature of recommendations and conclusions.  
Guides of writing memoranda, business letters.  
Oral presentation of technical reports.  
(One or two team papers to be prepared on assigned work).

CVE 403 - HYDRAULIC ENGINEERING (2-0-0 = 2 units)
Fundamental principles of Flow.  Hydraulic similitude.  
Flow measurement, Flow in closed conduits - steady and unsteady flows.  
Flow in open channels.  
Flow through hydraulic structures including river and coastal hydraulics.  
Hydraulic machinery - pumps and turbines.

CVE 493 - HYDRAULIC ENGINEERING LABORATORY (0-0-3 = 1 units)
Study of Laminar flow, flow measurements in open channel, hydraulic jump

CVE 405 - ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING I (2-0-0 = 2 units)
Role of the Engineer in the control of the environment in relation to water-related diseases.  
Examination of water and wastewater.  
Collection, treatment, protection and distribution of water.  
Collection, treatment and disposal of wastewaters.  
Fundamentals of solid waste management and air pollution control field trip.

CVE 495 -  ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING I LABORATORY (0-0-3 = 1 units)
Determination of alkalinity, acidity and pH in water.  
Jar test experiment, (coagulation) for determination of optimum dosage of alum, lime, speeds of slow mixing and rapid mixing etc. 
Bacteriological examination of water.  
Determination of solids concentrations (suspended solids, dissolved solids, total solids, volatile suspended solids).  
Determination of chlorine, dissolved oxygen in water.

CVE 407 - GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEERING I (2-0-0 = 2 units)
Role of the Geotechnical engineer in construction, Physical properties of soils; Factors governing soil formation, Soil classification.  
Introduction to permeability Seepage and filter requirements; Soil compaction, Principle of effective stress; Consolidation and settlement calculations; Shear strength of soils, bearing capacity.


CVE 409 - DESIGN OF CONCRETE STRUCTURES II (2-0-3 = 3 units)
Two-way slabs - design and detailing of one span and continuous slabs.  
Two-way ribbed and flat slabs.  
Reinforcement in foundations - pads and strip footings, slabs grids etc.  
Portal frames, beams and columns system.  
Retaining walls - cantilever and counterfort types.  
Liquid retaining structures; under and on-ground overhead tanks.  
Bunkers and silos. 
Precast concrete members and structures-rules of use and examples.  
Introduction to finite element.  
Student project.

CVE 411 - STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS II (2-1-0 = 3 units)
Analysis of statically indeterminate structures using various methods, moment-area, slope deflections, moment distribution, column analogy, compatibility and flexibility coefficients.  
Introduction to plastic analysis of structures.

CVE 413 - TRANSPORTATION ENGINEERING I (2-0-3 = 3 units)
Traffic Engineering: human and vehicular characteristics related to traffic, highway capacity, traffic studies and traffic data collection and analysis: 
- Principles of traffic planning and fore-casting 
- Principles of network planning 
- mass transit planning 
- traffic controls on highway and urban roads 
- One-way streets, signals, signs, smoking, lighting and canalization, traffic regulations regarding speed, zoning.

CVE 497 - GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEERING I LABORATORY (0-0-3 = 1 units)
Moisture content determination, Liquid and Plastic limits of soil, shrinkage limit, Particle size distribution:
- mechanical method, Particle size distribution 
- hydrometer method; Specific gravity of soils.  
Unconfined compression test; California bearing ratio (CBR) test, Triaxial test - Without pore pressure measurement, Direct shear test, Consolidation test.

CVE 501 - ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING II (2-0-3 = 3 units)
Introduction to the theory, design, construction operations and maintenance of facilities for treatment, pumping, storage distribution of water; and for collection, treatment and disposal of wastewaters.

CVE 502 - CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING (2-0-3 = 3 units)
Planning of construction operation, including scheduling (bar charts, CPM, PERT, etc.)  
Selection of construction equipment. 
Factors affecting equipment output, Studies of tractors, excavators, trucks, etc.  
Introduction to various construction methods such as for drilling, rock blasting and tunnelling.  
Practical exercises include staking out of buildings and roads.  
Site visits and report-writing on same are also included.

CVE 503 - GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEERING II (2-0-3 = 3 units)
Earth retaining structures to include cantilever and anchored sheet pile walls, strutted excavations.  
Design of shallow foundations to include strips and rafts.  
Deep foundations to include piles, piers and caissons.  
Slope stability and Earth dams.  
Introduction to site investigation to include location of suitable highway subgrade materials.

CVE 504 - ENGINEERING CONTRACTS AND SPECIFICATIONS (2-1-0 = 3 units)
Legal and professional relations in engineering preparation of specifications and Bill of Quantities.  
Contract laws, including essential elements of a valid contract. 
Labour laws, advertising.  
Contract documents.  
Legal aspects of construction supervision.

CVE 505 - DESIGN OF STEEL STRUCTURES (2-0-3 = 3 units)
Structural Steels - production, properties and shapes.  
Assumption of standard BS 5950.  
Connections - riveted, bolted and welded.  
Leads and their external and internal effects.  
Simple steel beams.  
Stanchions. 
Trusses.  
Plate girders.  
Example of the steel structure of industrial building.  
Student project.

CVE 506 - ARCHITECTURAL AND STRUCTURAL DETAILING (0-0-3 = 1 units)
Review of dimensional awareness, techniques in drafting of engineering drawings, plan and profile. 
Preparation of structural drawings from architectural drawings.  
Structural detailing; reinforcement schedule; structural working drawings of Civil Engineering structures.

CVE 509 - TRANSPORTATION ENGINEERING II (2-0-3 = 3 units)
Principles of highway location - design and economics 
			       - Earth-work volume computations and development of mass haul diagrams. 
			       - Principles and design of Asphaltic Concrete, subgrade, sub-base surfacing and drainage for highways and airports 
			       - Construction and maintenance of pavements.  
Analysis, classification, and use of base materials - Compacted and stabilised soils.  
Highway safety - Introduction to Traffic.

CVE 510 - ENGINEERING SYSTEMS ANALYSIS (2-1-0 = 3 units)
Systems approach to planning, design and operation of large-scale physical systems; economic and engineering concepts; linear programming; network analysis; decision analysis; concepts of problem formulation, synthesis and analysis.  
Application to transportation, construction, water resources, building and other engineering problems.

CVE 520 - STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS III (2-1-0 = 3 units)
Structural analysis of deflections and other structural characteristics using methods of matrix algebra, including flexibility and stiffness methods.  
Limit analysis of plan frames.  
Principles governing design of special structures such as somas, shells, suspension bridges, etc.

CVE 530 - APPLIED HYDROLOGY (2-0-2 = 3 units)
Systems analysis applied to river basin planning and development; statistical concepts in hydrology; flood forecasting; flood risks and return periods.  
Introduction to Remote Sensing techniques.

CVE 540 - TRANSPORTATION ENGINEERING III (2-1-0 = 3 units)
Traffic controls and signals.  
Planning, design and maintenance of railways; airports and harbours.  
Urban mass transportation.  
Design and maintenance of bridges and tunnels.

CVE 550 - ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING III (2-0-2 = 3 units)
Advanced treatment of the chemistry and microbiology of water and wastewater.  
Investigation and planning activities used for evaluating existing water and wastewater facilities, and for design and operation of new ones.  
Design of component parts of water and wastewater treatment units, including troughs, Parshall flumes, overflow weirs, etc.

CVE 560 - GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEERING III (2-1-0 = 3 units)
Further principles of site investigation to include bore holing for disturbed and undisturbed soils samples and for groundwater exploitation; soil reclamation.  Tunnelling practice.  
Elastic theories and soil deformation.  
Introduction to design of machine foundation.  
Review of recent developments in geotechnical engineering practice to include use of clay soil for containment of hazardous waste and in slurring trench cut-off use of geotextiles and reinforced earth.

CVE 570 - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT AND AIR POLLUTION CONTROL (2-1-0 = 3 units)
Problems of urban refuse, garbage and other solid wastes.  
Methods of collection and disposal including incineration, composition, landfill, etc.  
Sources of air pollution, factors affecting movement of air pollutants.  
Quantitative and qualitative aspects of pollutants.  
Air pollution control methods.

CVE 580 - DESIGN OF CONCRETE STRUCTURES III (2-1-0 = 3 units)
Selected problems of RC. 
structures; deep beams; brackets and corbels; beam-column joints in skeletons arch, shell and folded roofs; general problems of modern wall and skeleton buildings.
Prestressed concrete structures: materials.
Methods of prestressing: systems of tendons and anchorages, losses of prestressing, analysis of PC section.
Design of Prestressed beams: development of PC structures.

